1 Introduction
This document describes the Operations User Interface (OpsUI), a graphical user interface for the control and monitoring of the 
higher level robotic systems of the Liverpool Telescope. 



1.1 Telemetry
<about various streams and philosophy of pub-sub, rereg, svc-avail etc
streams come about as a result of architecture of the provider systems rather than
by natural design> 

Telemetry or status information is supplied by most of the higher level robotic systems and their sub-systems.
There are effectively 2 forms of telemetry.

Discrete event telemetry - notifications of significant events generated by the system as it performs its operations. 
eg Scheduler sweep completion event, Observation group starting event. 

Continuous telemetry - a regular stream of states and measurements generated by a system. 
e.g. Axis positions and node states.

The streams available at present are:-

TCM - Telescope Control and Monitoring. Continuous updates from the TCS relating to mechanism states and positions.
Obtained by polling the TCS using the various SHOW commands.

ICM - Instrument Control and Monitoring. Continuous updates of instrument status for the various instruments. 
Obtained by polling the relevant instrument control systems (ICS) using the GET_STATUS command.

METEO - Meteorology. Continuous updates of weather data. This is obtained from the WMS via the TCS SHOW METEO command,
from the Boltwood Cloud Sensor (BCS) via a cron script, Dust data from the TNG Dust monitor obtained via http request.

SKY - Sky conditions. Discrete event notification from the real-time data reduction pipeline (DPRT) as and when suitable 
images are taken by the science cameras. Extinction updates currently via manual setting.

SCHED - Scheduler. Discrete event notifications from the scheduler at the start of a scheduler sweep, 
as each candidate is checked and when the final selection decision is made.

PHASE2 - OSS / Phase 2 system. Discrete event notifications from the Phase2 cache. e.g. when groups are modified or added dynamically to
the Phase2 Observing Database (ODB).

OPS - Operations. Discrete event notifications from the RCS Task Managment System (TMS) when significant operational events
occur. E.g. An observation group is started, a group compeletes or fails.

Future streams.
At present some subsystems are not fully integrated, it is hoped these will be in future. These systems include:-

TEA - Telescope Embedded Agent (an RTML interface).
NSO - National Schools Observatory Interface (another XML interface to the phase2 system).
GCN - A socket based interface for receiving GCN notfications.

TASK - Task Management System. More detailed (fine-grained) task event notifications.

<a diagram of the flow of telemetry>

1.2 Launching the User Interface
The UI is launched from the linux command line in a terminal by invoking the script: /home/eng/opsgui/opsgui
Once the intial connections are made you will be asked to supply your user name - currently this is not checked but used "as entered".
If the initial connection cannot be made the UI loging will timeout and show an error message. 

<Diagram of init connection error>

< TBD - details of UI Login Dialog and configuration>


2 Layout and main elements of UI
<this is a very simple intro - no details of these elements yet>
When the OpsUI is started up a specific layout will be seen. This consists of a configurable set of displays.
There may be one or more of these displays, but one in particular will be designated as the primary display.
Any other displays are designated as either subsidiary or stand-alone.

All displays consist of one or more perspective tabs and a title bar.
In the case of the primary display there will also be a sidebar and topbar. 

<diagram showing areas marked out>

2.0 title bar of primary display (and others)
In the case of the primary display ( but not the subsidiary displays), the title bar contains the name of the interface (LT Operations UI)
followed by the login ID of the user. In all cases the name
of the display and the selected perspective are shown next.


2.1 sidebar and topbar
The sidebar and topbar are (always visible) areas containing summary information. There are several summary panels relating to
different telemetry feeds. In each case more detailed information is available in one or more of the various perspectives.

Initially each panel's title shows as grey. If the feed is not available the panel's title changes to red. 
This becomes blue when the feed is active.

<diagrams showing red/grey/blue>

The sidebar shows summaries of the following information:-

2.2 perspectives
<displays telemetry for a theme.
not a direct match stream to persp.>

A perspective is an area on a display used to group together information relating to a common theme. There is a rough
relationship between telemetry streams and perspectives though some perspectives display data from more than one stream and 
individual streams may serve more than one perspective.

A perspective will typically have a number of sub-panels accessed via tabs.

When a perspective is selected on a display, the display title changes to that of the chosen perspective and at the same time
the display's menubar changes to reflect the menus belonging to that prespective.



2.3 displays
we can group several Ps in a display can have one or many displays
can pull perspectives off a display into a standalone display with just that Persp

2.4 Menus

basic menus (control) and then special menus relating to the currently selected persp.
these change as P is selected


<< MORE DETAILS NOW >>

3.0 Sidebar - topbar

3.1 RCS status.
Overall status obtained from the RCS statemodel.
Status - Overall state of system: One of:- Engineering, Standby, Closing, Opening, Starting, Stopping, Operational. 
OpsMgr - Operations Manager state. One of:- Idle, Initializing, Finalizing, Observing.
Mode - Observing mode. One of:- Science, Background, Calibration, ToO, Mode-switch, None. 
Uptime - How long the RCS has been running for in hours and minutes. The color changes from red through to green after 1 hour.


3.2 Axes.
State and positions of each of the primary axes.
Azimuth - 
Altitude - 
Rotator - 

The state can be one of:- Tracking, Moving, Stopped, In-Position, Error, Fail, Offline.
<show colors>


3.3 Instruments.
State of each instrument system and temperatures of its sub-components. 
e.g. Frodo had Red and Blue sub-components, Ringo3 has D,E,F sub-components.

3.4 Sky.
Summary of sky conditions.
Seeing - The current seeing category in use by the scheduler. One of: Poor, Average, Good, Usable, Unusable.
Photom - Extinction state. One of:- Photometric, Spectroscopic.

3.5 State variables.
Status of each of the state-variable feeds into the RCS state-model. In general during operations each of these should be in a state 
where the background color is green.
<give details of what the state values mean>
System - Overall telescope system state (from MCP). Can be any of:- Standby, Okay, Fail,,
Axes - State of the primary axes. Can be one of:- Clear, Alert.
Weather - State of the weather. One of:- Clear, Alert.
Enclosure - State of enclosure system. One of:- Open, Closed, Moving, Error.
Mirror - State of mirror-cover.  One of:- Open, Closed, Moving, Error.
Control - Network interface state. One of:- Enabled, Disabled.
Network -  Network interface state. One of:- Connected, Alert.
Intent - Operations intention. One of:- Automatic, Manual.
Period - Time of day. One of: Daytime, Nighttime.

 If any state indicator is non-green, especially red, it indicates a problem. 
e.g when the Weather state indicator shows red it indicates that bad-weather is preventing operations. 
e.g. the Axes state indicator shows red it indicates a problem with one or more of the primary axes is preventing operations.

3.6 Observation.
The observation summary panel shows details of the group currently executing. 

TAG - The name of the Telescope Allocation Group (TAG) which supports/funds this project.
Program - The id of the group's program.
Proposal - The id of the group's proposal.
User - Username of the observer who specified this group.
Group - Name of the group.

3.7 Auxilliary systems.
This summary panel shows details of a number of subsystems which do not presently have their own perspectives.

NSO - Not yet available. No feed or firewall issue.
RTML - Not yet available. No feed or firewall issue.
GCN - Not yet available. No feed or firewall issue.
Synoptics - Indicates whether the Synoptic models are online. <details>
Base - Indicates whether the base models are online. <details>
Scheduler - Indicates whether the scheduler is online. <details>




4 Menus

File menu

<piccy>

Control Menu

<piccy>

5.0 Perspectives

general layout of these sections:
(a) what telem streams this P displays 
(b) special menus available
(c) the individual tabs for this P


5.1 instruments
---------------
The instruments perspective displays data from the various instrument (ICM) telemetry feeds.

Menus
-----

Subpanels
---------

History
Shows a stack of status history time plots for each instrument and sub-instrument. These plots show the health status of the instrument as
a color and highlight periods when the instrument is offline, impaired or non-functional.
The states are:-
OFFLINE (blue) - instrument control system is not contactable.
IMPAIRED (orange) - instrument is functional but operating outside optimal temperature range.
OKAY (green) - Instrument is functioning normally and within temperture range.
FAIL (red) - instrument is either non-functional or outside its safe temperature range.

Health
The health panel shows thumbnail temperature time series plots for all instruments. Where an instrument has sub-components the graphs for
each sub-component are on the same plot.

Individual instrument status
Each instrument has a specialized sub-panel showing significant status information. The instruments each have different sets of status
information available.

5.2 meteorology
---------------
The meteo perspective uses data from the METEO, TCM and SKY telemetry feeds to display data relating to the sky and weather conditions.
(The TCM feed is for the oil temperature which should really be in a seperate future ENV perspective).

Menus
-----

Sub-panels
----------

Data
Shows the current/latest values of the various weather variables
rain
wms
moisture
humidity
temperature
solar
pressure
wind speed
wind direction
cloud
dust

Trends
This panel contains a number of additional sub-panels for each of the individual weather variables showing the history
of these against time.
<more details> and pan/zoom/controls


Thumbs
This panel contains a set of small time-series plot thumbnails for each of the weather variables together at a glance 
to save switching between the various individual  trend plots.

Stats
Not yet available - will show histograms for the weather variables.

Sky
This panel shows details of the seeing measurments taken during the night.
Latest data - shows the most recent seeing update

History - is a table showing details of each seeing update
<table columns>

Plot - Shows a time-series plot of the seeing updates. There are several types of data distinguished.
<key plot>

Standards are used to provide a seeing prediction using an exponentially smoothed average of the last n-samples.
Science data can be used to improve the prediction but not to un-improve.
Prediction is the predicted seeing at zenith in R-band.


5.3 tracking/astrometry
---------------
The tracking perspective uses telemetry from the TCM, SCHED and OPS feeds to show details of the telescope's movements and operations during the night. 

Menus
-----

Sub-panels
---------------
Altaz
The Altaz panel shows a view of the sky in altaz coordinates as either an Aitoff or Mollweide projection. Various layers can be overlayed using the Overlay menu.
The position history of the telescope is shown as a series of unconnected trails indicating when it was tracking a particular target. The lengths of the traces shows how long the target was tracked for. The color of the trails is age-dependant and is set using the Overlays->History menu. A number of catalogs can be overlayed onto the display - these show up as small symbols with the target's name beside depending on configuration. Some of these are included automatically, others can be loaded from disk or entered manually via the Catalog menu.

Sweep catalog - is an automatically provided catalog and shows the results of the latest scheduler sweep. If the Show last combo is set to 1 then only the last sweep entry is shown. If All targets is selected then all of the targets in the sweep are displayed.

Ops catalog - is an automatically provided catalog which displays the most recent target(s) being executed by the RCS. By default only the latest target is displayed.

RaDec
The RaDec panel shows a view of the sky in RA/Dec coordinates. Each target observed is shown as a symbol on the display.


Additonal subpanels include.
Elevation view - shows a plot through time of a target's elevation with various embelishments.
etcetc

5.4 phase2/smp
---------------

Menus
-----

Subpanels
---------

Cache tree

Group details

Feasibility view

Slice view


5.5 scheduler
---------------

Menus
-----

Subpanels
---------

Candidates

Rejects (disabled due to network load)

Stats (not used)

Metrics (not used)

Contention

Scoring

Group Audit


5.6 operations
---------------

Menus
-----

Subpanels
---------

History

Table

Current

5.7 (services)
---------------

Menus
-----

Subpanels
---------




